HAS BROUGHT WITH IT
THE LARGEST MOVEMENT OF PEOPLE
IN THE HISTORY
OF MODERN TIMES.
EVERYWHERE, MILLIONS
OF PEOPLE ARE ON THEIR WAY
TO SOMEWHERE NEW.
NO WALL OR BARRIER IS
STRONG ENOUGH TO STOP MIGRANTS
AS THEY CROSS
INTERNATIONAL BORDERS
ON A JOURNEY TO WHERE
THE ACTION IS:
THE GLOBAL CITIES.
[PEOPLE CHEERING, SHOUTING]
NARRATOR: MEXICO CITY IS
AN URGENT, OVERCROWDED CITY.
THE MOST POPULATED METROPOLIS
IN THE WORLD,
20 MILLION PEOPLE
CALL MEXICO CITY HOME.
THIS IS A CITY
OF CONTRASTS.
HERE, YOU FIND THE WORLD
OF GLOBALIZATION...
AND A WORLD OF SLUMS
AND OPEN-AIR MARKETS.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
IN MEXICO CITY,
THE BENEFITS OF GLOBALIZATION
ARE UNEVENLY DISTRIBUTED.
THE WINNERS
OF GLOBALIZATION
ENJOY A HIGH STANDARD
OF LIVING
AND ALL THE LUXURIES
OF THE MODERN WORLD.
[WOMAN SPEAKING SPANISH]
[WOMAN TRANSLATING IVANOVA]
YOU FIND EVERYTHING HERE--
SHOPPING MALLS
WITH HIGH FASHION,
LIKE YOU FIND
EVERYWHERE IN THE WORLD,
BUT THE PRICES
ARE A BIT HIGHER.
NARRATOR:
THE GLOBALIZATION LOSERS,
MOSTLY NATIVE PEOPLE
WHO MIGRATED TO THE BIG CITY
LOOKING FOR WORK,
FIND ALL BUT THE LOWEST-PAID
JOBS CLOSED TO THEM,
SO THEY HAVE TO INVENT
WAYS TO SURVIVE.
[MAN SPEAKING SPANISH]
[MAN TRANSLATING CRUZ]
I LOOK AFTER PEOPLE'S CARS.
I MAKE SURE NO ONE STEALS THEM
OR THE POLICE TOWS THEM AWAY.
I'M SUPPOSED TO GET
A DOLLAR A DAY,
BUT SOMETIMES PEOPLE
ONLY GIVE ME
20 CENTS
FOR THE WHOLE DAY,
AND VERY OFTEN THEY
DON'T EVEN SAY "THANK YOU."
THEY JUST DRIVE AWAY.
[CAR HORN HONKING]
[WOMAN SPEAKING SPANISH]
[WOMAN TRANSLATING]
TO HELP MY PARENTS,
I SELL CALLING CARDS
FOR CELL PHONES.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
THEY PAY ME SIX PESOS
FOR EACH HUNDRED-PESO CARD
THAT I SELL.
I MAKE ABOUT
SEVEN DOLLARS A DAY.
NARRATOR: WITH GLOBALIZATION,
MEXICO HAS BECOME
ONE OF THE WORLD'S
MOST ACTIVE TRADING NATIONS.
ITS EXPORTS
HAVE RISEN DRAMATICALLY
FROM 52 BILLION DOLLARS A YEAR
TO 275 BILLION.
AND MEXICO IS
THE LARGEST RECIPIENT
OF FOREIGN INVESTMENT
IN LATIN AMERICA.
MAN: I THINK
MEXICO HAS BEEN
A GOOD PLACE TO INVEST
MOST OF THE TIME.
AND I THINK
ONE OF THE REASONS
THAT MEXICO IS
A GOOD PLACE TO INVEST
IS OUR POLITICAL STABILITY.
WE ARE A COUNTRY
WITH A DEMOCRATIC GOVERNMENT.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
[MAN TRANSLATING] THERE IS
NO DEMOCRACY OR EQUALITY HERE
BECAUSE 85 PERCENT
OF THE PEOPLE ARE POOR
AND, ON TOP OF THAT,
THE INDIAN PEOPLE
ARE VERY OFTEN
DISCRIMINATED AGAINST.
[IVANOVA SPEAKING SPANISH]
[WOMAN TRANSLATING]
A LOT OF TIMES,
I CAN HEAR MEXICANS SAY
BAD THINGS ABOUT INDIANS.
I DO BELIEVE
THERE IS DISCRIMINATION.
IT'S SOMETHING THAT THEY
CARRY DEEP INSIDE THEM.
AND I THINK THERE IS A BIG
CONFLICT BETWEEN MEXICANS,
BUT, AS A FOREIGNER,
I CAN'T BE PART
OF THAT CONFLICT.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
[MAN TRANSLATING DESCOMBEY]
AS AN INVOLVED FOREIGNER,
I SEE THIS CONFLICT
AS ONE OF HUMANRIGHTS.
WHEN WE TALK ABOUT
HUMAN RIGHTS,
WE USUALLY
TALK ABOUT TORTURE.
BUT HERE IN MEXICO CITY,
THE HUMAN RIGHTS
OF MILLIONS OF PEOPLE
WHO LIVE IN EXTREME POVERTY
ARE BEING VIOLATED EVERY DAY,
AND I THINK A DECENT LIVING
IS ALSO A HUMAN RIGHT.
[MAN SPEAKING SPANISH]
[MAN TRANSLATING]
I GO AROUND THE STREETS
WITH MY CART
PICKING UP GARBAGE.
I MANAGE TWO TRIPS TO THE DUMP
A DAY, SEVEN DAYS A WEEK.
PEOPLE PAY ME
WHATEVER THEY WANT.
I MAKE ABOUT
FIVE DOLLARS A DAY.
NARRATOR:
IN MEXICO CITY,
POVERTY HAS REACHED
CRISIS PROPORTIONS.
66 PERCENT OF ITS INHABITANTS
ARE CONSIDERED POOR
AND 30 PERCENT OF THEM LIVE
ON LESS THAN TWO DOLLARS A DAY.
THE PROBLEM IS NOT
THAT MEXICO IS
A POOR COUNTRY
WITHOUT RESOURCES.
THE PROBLEM IS A BAD SYSTEM
OF DISTRIBUTING WEALTH.
AND POVERTY IS INCREASING
DESPITE A HIGHER
EDUCATIONAL LEVEL
IN THE POPULATION
AS A WHOLE.
IT SEEMS THAT
A BETTER EDUCATION
DOES NOT NECESSARILY MEAN
A MEXICAN CAN ESCAPE
A LIFE OF POVERTY.
[MAN SPEAKING SPANISH]
[MAN TRANSLATING]
I'M A PSYCHOLOGIST,
BUT HERE IN MEXICO CITY
THERE ARE NO JOBS
IN MY PROFESSION,
SO I HAVE TO WORK
WITH GARBAGE.
[MAN SPEAKING SPANISH]
TRANSLATOR:
I MAKE MORE HERE
DIVING FOR STUFF
THAT I THEN SELL FOR RECYCLING
THAN AS A PSYCHOLOGIST.
[MORALES SPEAKING SPANISH]
THEY ONLY MAKE
ABOUT 40 DOLLARS A WEEK,
NOT EVEN ENOUGH
TO FEED YOUR FAMILY.
NARRATOR:
IN MEXICO CITY,
GLOBALIZATION HAS
SHARPLY INCREASED
THE DISPARITY
BETWEEN RICH AND POOR.
BUT ECONOMIC GROWTH
IN MEXICO
AT AROUND 6.5 PERCENT
A YEAR IS STRONG,
AND IT'S ONLY ONE
OF THE MANY FACTORS
ATTRACTING FOREIGN INVESTORS.
[MAN SPEAKING SPANISH]
[MAN TRANSLATING ZORILLA]
WE'RE IN THE FOREFRONT
AS AN ELECTRONIC MARKET
WITH METHODS OF OPERATION
IN TECHNOLOGY
ON THE SAME LEVEL WITH THE MAIN
GLOBAL FINANCIAL MARKETS.
[ZORILLA SPEAKING SPANISH]
TRANSLATOR: THIS ALLOWS US
TO ATTRACT INVESTORS
AND TO WORK
WITH PENSION FUNDS,
INVESTMENT BANKS
AND VENTURE CAPITAL COMPANIES.
NARRATOR:
MEXICO IS THE DARLING
OF THE LEGION
OF GLOBAL INVESTORS
WHO CAN COLLECTIVELY TOPPLE
OR SEND BOOMING
THE ECONOMIES
OF DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
WITH A FEW CLICKS
OF A COMPUTER MOUSE.
THE MAIN ATTRACTION
ARE THE BARGAINS
IN MEXICO CITY'S STOCK MARKET.
HERE, YOU CAN INVEST IN STOCKS
THAT GENERATE DOLLAR INCOME
FROM SAFE SOURCES.
NARRATOR: INVESTORS
GET THE KIND OF SAFETY
THEY FIND IN NORTH AMERICA
OR EUROPE
BUT WITH MUCH HIGHER RETURNS.
[ZORILLA SPEAKING SPANISH]
TRANSLATOR:
HERE IN MEXICO,
WE NOW HAVE POLITICAL STABILITY
AND SOUND ECONOMIC POLICIES.
THIS HAS GENERATED
A POSITIVE FRAMEWORK
TO ATTRACT
THE FLOW OF CAPITAL
AND TO ATTRACT
FOREIGN INVESTORS.
[TRAFFIC NOISES]
NARRATOR: IN A GLOBALIZED,
INTERDEPENDENT ECONOMY,
MEXICO'S REAL ATTRACTION
TO FOREIGN INVESTORS
IS NOT POLITICAL STABILITY
OR SOUND ECONOMIC POLICIES
BUT A LOW-WAGE WORK FORCE
CAPABLE OF PERFORMING WELL,
LEARN AND TRAIN QUICKLY
AND DELIVER
WORLD-CLASS PRODUCTS.
[SPEAKING GERMAN]
TRANSLATOR:
THE ONLY REASON
WHY WE MOVED
OUR PRODUCTION FACILITIES
FROM GERMANY TO MEXICO CITY
IS SALARIES.
[DEWITZ SPEAKING GERMAN]
TRANSLATOR: WHILE IN GERMANY
WE HAVE TO PAY A SKILLED WORKER
FROM 35 TO 40 DOLLARS AN HOUR,
HERE IN MEXICO CITY
WE PAY THAT SAME WORKER
FIVE OR SIX DOLLARS A DAY.
NARRATOR: AND TO EARN
THIS BASIC PAY,
A WORKER IN MEXICO CITY
CAN TAKE UP TO FOUR HOURS
TO GET TO HIS JOB.
[WHISTLE BLOWING]
RUSH HOUR IS AN ORDEAL
IN THIS IMPOSSIBLE METROPOLIS,
AND THE ARGUMENT OVER HOW
TO GET THE CITY MOVING
BREAKS DOWN SHARPLY
ALONG RACE AND CLASS LINES.
PEOPLE WHO ARE RICHER
AND, TO PUT IT BLUNTLY, WHITER,
WITH MORE SPANISH
THAN INDIAN BLOOD,
TEND TO FAVOR THE IDEA
OF MORE HIGHWAYS.
PEOPLE WHO ARE
POORER AND BROWNER
WOULD LIKE TO HAVE
MORE PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION.
[CAR HORN HONKING]
PEOPLE WHO ARE
POORER AND BROWNER
WOULD ALSO LIKE
TO HAVE THE RIGHT
TO SELL ON THE STREETS.
PEOPLE WHO ARE
RICHER AND WHITER
ARE AGAINST SELLING
ON THE STREETS.
WE ARE WORKING
WITH THE GOVERNMENT.
NOW WE JUST STARTED
IN THE HISTORICAL DISTRICT
OF MEXICO CITY
A NEW PROGRAM
WITH THE MAYOR.
AND MOVING THE PEOPLE
WHO SELL ON THE STREETS
IS PART OF THE PROJECT.
AND WE WILL BE EXPECTING
THAT IN THE NEXT FEW MONTHS
THEY ARE NOT GOING
TO BE THERE ANYMORE.
NARRATOR:
NO ONE REALLY KNOWS
HOW MANY VENDORS WORK
THE STREETS OF MEXICO CITY.
ESTIMATES RANGE FROM
2 TO 2.5 MILLION.
AND AS THE CITY GOVERNMENT
PREPARES A PLAN TO BAN THEM
FROM THE CITY CENTER,
DAILY PROTESTS BY VENDORS
AND THEIR SUPPORTERS
GO BEYOND THE OBVIOUS DEMANDS
FOR FREEDOM TO SELL
IN THE STREETS.
THESE PEOPLE ARE ALSO
ELOQUENTLY CONDEMNING
A DIVIDED AND UNEQUAL SOCIETY.
[CROWD SHOUTING IN SPANISH]
[WOMAN SPEAKING SPANISH]
TRANSLATOR: IN 1994, I CAME
TO WORK WITH MY MOTHER.
SHE'S BEEN SELLING TACOS
HERE FOR 27 YEARS,
SO I ALSO STARTED
SELLING TACOS.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
TRANSLATOR: THIS IS
OUR PERMANENT PLACE,
AND THE CITY
HAS TO RESPECT IT
BECAUSE NOW WE KNOW
HOW TO DEFEND OURSELVES
AND WE WILL NOT BE MADE FOOLS
BY FALSE LEADERS AGAIN.
WE WILL NOT ALLOW POLICEMEN
TO COME AND TELL US,
"GIVE ME SOME MONEY, OR
I'LL KICK YOU OUT OF HERE."
NOW WE KNOW OUR RIGHTS.
[PROTESTORS CHANTING]
TRANSLATOR:
NOW WE HAVE A PERMIT
TO SELL TACOS
ON THIS CORNER,
BUT I STILL SEE
THE POLICE COMING HERE
AND TAKING AWAY THE MERCHANDISE
OF MANY VENDORS.
OFTEN, THEY ALSO BEAT THEM UP.
THERE ARE SOME POLICEMEN
WHO STILL DO THAT.
[PROTESTORS SHOUTING]
NARRATOR:
ONLY TWO KILOMETERS AWAY
FROM WHERE THE STREET VENDORS
ARE CLASHING WITH RIOT POLICE,
BUT ON ANOTHER PLANET,
COPARMEX, A BUSINESS UNION
WHOSE MEMBERSHIP INCLUDES
SOME OF THE LARGEST
CORPORATIONS IN MEXICO CITY,
IS HOLDING
ITS ANNUAL CONVENTION.
[APPLAUSE]
[WOMAN SPEAKING SPANISH]
[WOMAN TRANSLATING BECERRIL]
CORPORATE EXECUTIVES
ARE THE FOURTH POWER
IN THIS COUNTRY,
BECAUSE IF ONE OF THEM SAYS,
"I DON'T LIKE THIS POLICY,"
AND THREATENS TO TAKE
HIS INVESTMENTS OUT OF MEXICO,
THE GOVERNMENT IS FORCED
TO PAY ATTENTION
AND HAS TO CHANGE
THAT POLICY.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
ARRIAGA:
WE FEEL THAT WE LIVE
IN A QUITE
MORE DEMOCRATIC COUNTRY,
AND LIVING IN A DEMOCRACY
HAS THOSE SITUATIONS.
YOU HAVE TO FACE SITUATIONS
THAT YOU DON'T LIKE,
BUT YOU HAVE TO FACE THEM,
AND TRY TO WORK WITH THEM,
AND TRY TO UNDERSTAND THEM,
AND TRY TO PURSUE THEM
ON WHAT YOU FEEL IS IMPORTANT.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
TRANSLATOR: IN MEXICO,
THE WINNERS OF GLOBALIZATION
ARE THE RICH
AND THE BIG CORPORATIONS
THAT HAVE ACCESS
TO THE GLOBAL MARKET.
IN THIS COUNTRY,
ONLY 300 COMPANIES EXPORT.
NINETY PERCENT OF ALL MEXICAN
EXPORTS ARE IN THEIR HANDS.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
THE BIG LOSER OF GLOBALIZATION
IS THE MIDDLE CLASS.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
TRANSLATOR:
IN MEXICO CITY,
THERE ARE NO LONGER
OPPORTUNITIES FOR THESE PEOPLE.
[BECERRIL CONTINUES
IN SPANISH]
TRANSLATOR:
YOU CAN OFTEN FIND
PEOPLE WITH
A UNIVERSITY DEGREE,
EVEN MEDICAL DOCTORS,
DRIVING A TAXI.
[WOMAN SPEAKING SPANISH]
TRANSLATOR: I HAVE BEEN
LOOKING FOR A JOB FOR A MONTH.
RIGHT NOW,
HERE IN MEXICO CITY,
THERE IS LOTS OF UNEMPLOYMENT,
SO IT'S NOT EASY
TO FIND A JOB.
I LOOK FOR WORK EVERY DAY.
I SEND MY CURRICULUM,
GO TO INTERVIEWS,
BUT I CAN'T FIND ANYTHING.
[RESENDIS CONTINUES
IN SPANISH]
TRANSLATOR:
I REALLY BELIEVE
THAT WE HAVE BEEN
DEEPLY AFFECTED
BY THIS GLOBALIZATION THING.
I DON'T REALLY
EXPECT LUXURIES,
BUT I NEED A ROOF
OVER MY HEAD,
A HOME WITH
THE BASIC SERVICES--
YOU KNOW,
ELECTRICITY, HOT WATER.
THE MIDDLE CLASS
HAS BEEN AFFECTED, YEAH,
BUT PEOPLE IN LOWER INCOME
BRACKETS ARE DROWNING
BECAUSE THE PRICES
SEEM TO SQUEEZE HARDER
ON THOSE WHO ARE POOR.
[BOY SPEAKING SPANISH]
TRANSLATOR: HERE WITH
MY BROTHER AND SISTER,
WE MAKE ABOUT
TWO DOLLARS A DAY,
AND WE GIVE ALL THE MONEY
TO OUR MOTHER TO BUY FOOD.
SOME PEOPLE GIVE GOOD TIPS,
BUT MOST PEOPLE
GIVE US NOTHING.
[TRAFFIC NOISES]
NARRATOR: MEXICO CITY
IS A MODERN METROPOLIS,
BUT ALSO TEEMS
WITH SIGNS OF ITS PAST.
ITS CULTURE, INHERITED EQUALLY
FROM THE SPANISH CONQUERORS
AND THEIR AZTEC ENEMIES,
MAKES IT MUCH MORE THAN
JUST ANOTHER GLOBAL CITY.
[MACHINERY HUMMING]
AN URGENCY TO MODERNIZE
HAS TORN DOWN
MOST OF THE OLD STRUCTURES,
LEAVING ONLY
AN OCCASIONAL SPANISH MANSION
AMONG THE OFFICE TOWERS...
OR A SPLENDID CHURCH
HIGH AND DRY
AMONG THE TRAFFIC JAMS.
[CAR HORNS HONKING]
AND THE ONLY REMINDER
OF THE IMPERIAL CAPITAL
BUILT BY THE AZTECS
CENTURIES BEFORE THE ARRIVAL
OF THE SPANISH CONQUERORS
IS THE FLOATING GARDENS
OF XOCHIMILCO.
[MAN SINGING IN SPANISH]
NARRATOR: XOCHIMILCO WITH
ITS 180 KILOMETERS OF CANALS
IS NOW A WEEKEND PLAYGROUND
FOR MEXICO CITY'S MIDDLE CLASS.
[SINGING CONTINUES]
[MAN SPEAKING SPANISH]
[MAN TRANSLATING RODRIGUEZ]
XOCHIMILCO IS A GOOD PLACE
TO COME WITH YOUR FRIENDS,
TO HAVE A GOOD TIME,
EAT TACOS,
HAVE A FEW DRINKS OF TEQUILA,
LISTEN TO MARIACHI MUSIC.
WE LIKE TO HAVE MANY FRIENDS.
WE'RE A HAPPY-GO-LUCKY PEOPLE.
[SINGING CONTINUES]
NARRATOR: THE FLOATING GARDENS
OF XOCHIMILCO
ALSO ATTRACT
THE INDIAN MIGRANTS
LIVING IN MEXICO CITY.
[SHOUTING IN SPANISH]
NARRATOR:
ESPECIALLY ON WEEKENDS,
THOUSANDS COME TO BUY AND SELL
IN THESE OPEN-AIR MARKETS.
BUT IT'S NOT JUST ABOUT
BUYING AND SELLING.
IT'S THE SOUNDS, THE SMELLS
AND THE SENTIMENTAL MEMORY OF
THE VILLAGES THEY LEFT BEHIND
WHEN THEY MIGRATED
TO THE BIG CITY.
AS OPPOSED
TO OTHER GLOBAL CITIES,
WHERE MIGRANTS COME
FROM OTHER COUNTRIES,
THE FACE OF MEXICO CITY
IS BEING CHANGED
BY MILLIONS
OF INDIAN MIGRANTS
WHO'VE COME FROM OTHER REGIONS
IN MEXICO.
THE NATIVE PEOPLE
WHO FOR GENERATIONS,
CENTURIES EVEN,
HAVE BOWED DOWN TO AUTHORITY,
ARE NOW TAKING TO THE STREETS
AND HOLDING THOSE IN POWER
RESPONSIBLE FOR THEIR ACTIONS.
[MAN SPEAKING SPANISH]
TRANSLATOR: WE'VE BEEN CAMPING
HERE FOR SIX WEEKS.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
TRANSLATOR:
WE'RE DEMANDING AN AMNESTY
TO LIBERATE 20 MEN
OF OUR VILLAGE
WHO ARE ACCUSED
OF COLLABORATING
WITH THE ZAPATISTA REBELS.
[GUERRERO CONTINUES
IN SPANISH]
TRANSLATOR: WE'RE ALSO
DEMANDING AN AMNESTY
FOR ALL OTHER
POLITICAL PRISONERS.
[SIREN WAILING]
NARRATOR:
AMONG THE NATIVES
CAMPING IN MEXICO CITY'S
MAIN SQUARE
IS FRANCISCO LOPEZ
WHO HAS JUST BEEN RELEASED
FROM TWO YEARS IN PRISON
ON SUSPICION
OF SUBVERSIVE ACTIVITIES.
[LOPEZ SPEAKING SPANISH]
TRANSLATOR: WE HAVEN'T
DONE ANYTHING WRONG.
WE JUST ASKED FOR HELP
FROM THE GOVERNMENT,
AND INSTEAD,
THEY THREW US IN JAIL.
[LOPEZ CONTINUING
IN SPANISH]
TRANSLATOR: MY SON AND
MANY OTHERS ARE STILL IN JAIL.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
TRANSLATOR: WE WANT
OUR FRIENDS TO BE FREE.
NARRATOR: IN 1997,
THIS ABANDONED
HISTORICAL BUILDING
IN DOWNTOWN MEXICO CITY
WAS OCCUPIED BY 49 HOMELESS
INDIGENOUS FAMILIES
WHO REFUSED
TO LEAVE THE BUILDING.
IN THE MIGRANT COMMUNITIES
OF MEXICO CITY,
AS KIDS,
WOMAN OBEY THEIR FATHERS.
AS TEENAGERS, THEIR FATHERS
AND THEIR BROTHERS;
WHEN MARRIED, THEIR HUSBANDS;
AND AS OLD LADIES,
THEIR SONS.
IN THE OLDEN DAYS, NATIVE WOMEN
FOLLOWED THIS PATTERN,
BUT THEY ARE NOW
LEAVING IT BEHIND,
AND THEY'RE EMERGING
AS THE ENGINE OF CHANGE.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
[WOMAN TRANSLATING MAYA]
WE OCCUPIED THIS BUILDING
WHEN WE REALIZED THAT,
AS INDIGENOUS WOMEN,
WE HAD TO ORGANIZE OURSELVES.
[MAYA CONTINUES IN SPANISH]
TRANSLATOR:
OUR OBJECTIVE IS
TO FIGHT FOR
A DECENT PLACE TO LIVE.
THE UPRISING
OF OUR ZAPATISTA BROTHERS
GAVE US THE IDEA
THAT WE ALSO HAVE RIGHTS.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
TRANSLATOR: WE'RE ACCUSED
OF BEING ZAPATISTAS
BECAUSE WE'RE INDIANS
AND WE ARE POOR.
THAT'S OUR CRIME.
AND BECAUSE
WE SPEAK THE TRUTH,
AND BECAUSE HERE IN MEXICO
A FEW PEOPLE HAVE
ALL THE ECONOMIC POWER,
BUT MOST OF US ARE POOR.
[GUNFIRE, SHOUTING]
NARRATOR: IN 1994,
THE ZAPATISTA REBELS
BEGAN AN UPRISING
OVER INDIGENOUS RIGHTS
IN THE SOUTHEASTERN STATE
OF CHIAPAS.
THE ZAPATISTAS
STOPPED FIGHTING
AFTER THE FIRST TWO WEEKS
OF THEIR REBELLION,
BUT THEIR UPRISING CONTINUES.
TO END THEIR REBELLION,
THE ZAPATISTAS
ARE DEMANDING LAWS
THAT PROTECT
INDIGENOUS RIGHTS AND CULTURE.
THE INTERNATIONAL CIRCULATION
THROUGH THE WEB
OF THE ZAPATISTA REBELLION
IN MEXICO
HAS BECOME ONE OF
THE MOST SUCCESSFUL EXAMPLES
OF THE USE
OF COMPUTER TECHNOLOGY
BY AN INSURGENT GROUP.
THE ZAPATISTAS
HAVE EARNED THE NICKNAME
OF THE "INTERNET GUERRILLAS."
THEIR WEB NETWORK,
A CLEARINGHOUSE
OF ZAPATISTA INFORMATION,
WITH SEVEN WEB SITES
OF THEIR OWN
AND HUNDREDS OF SITES
FROM INTERNATIONAL SUPPORTERS,
CONTINUES TO GROW.
IN MEXICO, AND ESPECIALLY
IN MEXICO CITY,
MORE AND MORE YOUNG PEOPLE
SEE COMPUTER TECHNOLOGY
AS A VEHICLE
TO BRING EQUALITY,
PROSPERITY AND DEMOCRACY.
[MAN SPEAKING SPANISH]
[MAN TRANSLATING ALOR]
I LOOK AT NEW TECHNOLOGIES
AS A GREAT OPPORTUNITY
FOR AN UNDERDEVELOPED COUNTRY
LIKE MEXICO TO GET AHEAD...
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
TRANSLATOR:
IF THE BIG CORPORATIONS,
WHICH CONTROL TECHNOLOGY
AND THE GOVERNMENT,
TURN TO LOOK AT THE PEOPLE
WHO ARE POOR
AND TRY TO USE TECHNOLOGY
TO BRIDGE THE GAP
BETWEEN RICH AND POOR.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
TRANSLATOR: BECAUSE THE DIGITAL
GAP WE HAVE IN MEXICO
IS A REFLECTION OF THE GAP
BETWEEN RICH AND POOR,
THEN WE,
AS INTERNET COMMUNICATORS,
CAN PLAY AN IMPORTANT ROLE.
[MAN SPEAKING SPANISH]
[MAN TRANSLATING REYES]
TECHNOLOGY IS ALREADY BRIDGING
THE GAP BETWEEN RICH AND POOR
BECAUSE RICH OR POOR PEOPLE
ARE NOW USING
THE SAME TECHNOLOGY.
WHOEVER WANTS TO SEND
AN E-MAIL CAN DO IT
THROUGHOUT THE DAY.
WHETHER YOU'RE RICH OR POOR,
EVERYBODY IS INTERACTING
WITH THE SAME TECHNOLOGY.
MAN: THE PERCENTAGE
OF KIDS USING COMPUTERS
IS REAL, REAL HIGH.
PROBABLY FIVE OUT OF TEN KIDS
HAVE ACCESS TO INTERNET
AT THEIR FRIEND'S HOUSE,
OR AT THE SCHOOL,
OR IN A CYBER CAFé.
KIDS ARE EXCHANGING
DIGITAL MUSIC,
PICTURES,
SOMETIMES EVEN VIDEOS,
WRITING E-MAIL, CHATTING,
SENDING INSTANT MESSAGING,
BUYING MOVIE THEATER TICKETS
ON THE INTERNET.
AND THAT'S VERY COOL.
THAT'S SOMETHING
THAT'S HAPPENING OUT THERE.
[ELECTRONIC VOICE]
FIRE! FIRE!
[GUNFIRE]
[ALOR SPEAKING SPANISH]
TRANSLATOR: WE DECIDED
TO LAUNCH A PLATFORM
THAT WOULD GO BEYOND
JUST THE INTERNET,
A PLATFORM DIRECTED
ESPECIALLY TO YOUNG PEOPLE,
A MEDIUM THAT TALKS TO THEM
ABOUT THE HUMAN SIDE
OF TECHNOLOGY.
WE DO COVER HIGH-TECH TOPICS
BUT FROM A DIFFERENT
PERSPECTIVE.
WE DON'T LIMIT OURSELVES
TO TECHNICAL ASPECTS.
WE ALSO OFFER
SOME SOCIAL CONTENT.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
TRANSLATOR:
WE ALSO HAD THE IDEA
TO MEXICANIZE
THE DIGITAL CULTURE.
THAT'S WHY WE SEE TECHNOLOGY
FROM A MORE HUMAN PERSPECTIVE
AND, ABOVE ALL,
FROM A MEXICAN PERSPECTIVE.
THIS MEXICANIZATION PROCESS
INVOLVES TWO IMPORTANT ASPECTS:
FIRST, YOUR FEELING
AS A MEXICAN,
AND SECOND,
FINDING THE RESOURCES
THAT YOU NEED
TO MAKE IT HAPPEN.
[ALOR SPEAKING SPANISH]
TRANSLATOR: YEAH,
BECAUSE FOREIGN COMPANIES,
LIKE ZIFF DAVIS ORPC,
CAN PLACE THEIR PRODUCT HERE...
BUT THEY'RE ONLY REMAKES
FROM OTHER PARTS OF THE WORLD.
WHAT MAKES OUR PRODUCT UNIQUE
IS ITS MEXICAN IDENTITY.
[MAN SPEAKING SPANISH]
TRANSLATOR:
FOR MANY YOUNG MEXICANS,
DIGITAL CULTURE HAS TRULY
BECOME AN ECONOMIC ALTERNATIVE.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
TRANSLATOR:
BECAUSE THE ONLY OPTIONS
COMING FROM CORPORATIONS OR
THE GOVERNMENT ARE UNEMPLOYMENT
OR SELLING WHATEVER YOU CAN
ON THE STREETS,
WHILE DOT-COM TRAINING
GIVES US THE OPTION
TO PLACE MUSIC
OR OTHER PRODUCTS
ON THE INTERNET MARKET
AND MAKE A GOOD,
DECENT LIVING.
[EXPLOSIONS ON COMPUTER]
[MAN SPEAKING SPANISH]
TRANSLATOR:
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT GENERATING
THOUSANDS OF NEW JOBS,
THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE
WHO FIND WORK
IN THE NEW DOT-COM ECONOMY,
FROM RECORD STORES TO CLUBS
AND ALL THE INDEPENDENT
TECHNO MUSIC LABELS
THAT ARE APPEARING AND SELLING
THEIR PRODUCT ON THE INTERNET.
THESE ARE SMALL INDUSTRIES
WHICH DIDN'T EXIST BEFORE.
[TECHNO MUSIC PLAYING]
[MAN SPEAKING SPANISH]
TRANSLATOR:
IN MEXICO CITY,
TECHNO MUSIC
STARTED FROM ZERO...
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
BECAUSE WE FIRST
HAD TO LEARN
HOW TO ADAPT DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
TO OUR MUSIC SCENE.
AT THE SAME TIME,
WE WANTED TO MIX TECHNO MUSIC
WITH THE MEXICAN WAY
OF MAKING MUSIC.
[TECHNO MUSIC PLAYING]
NARRATOR:
IN MEXICO CITY,
DIGITAL CULTURE IS NOT
ALL BUSINESS AND GAMES.
IT IS BECOMING
THE PEOPLE'S CULTURE--
YOUNG, WITH A REBEL FACE.
FOR THE PAST THREE YEARS,
WITH SUPPORT FROM GERMANY'S
GOETHE CULTURAL INSTITUTE,
YOUNG TECHIES
HAVE STAGED "TECHNOGEIST,"
A MASSIVE
TECHNO MUSIC HAPPENING
IN DOWNTOWN MEXICO CITY.
[SAUCEDO SPEAKING SPANISH]
TRANSLATOR: THIS YEAR,
TECHNOGEIST HAD A CONFRONTATION
WITH THE CITY AUTHORITIES.
IN THE TWO PREVIOUS YEARS,
WE HAVE BEEN GIVEN PERMITS
TO STAGE THE FESTIVAL
AS A CULTURAL EVENT,
BUT THIS YEAR THEY DENIED US
THE SAME KIND OF PERMIT.
SO WE TURNED THE WHOLE THING
INTO A POLITICAL PROTEST,
AND THOUSANDS
OF YOUNG PEOPLE
TOOK TO THE STREETS TO DEMAND
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
AND THE RIGHT
TO USE PUBLIC SPACES.
[MAN SPEAKING GERMAN]
TRANSLATOR: TECHNO MUSIC
HAS BECOME A GLOBAL PHENOMENON.
[SPEAKING GERMAN]
[MAN TRANSLATING SCHERER]
AND POLITICIANS AND GOVERNMENTS
WHO WANT THEIR COUNTRIES
TO BE GLOBAL PLAYERS
SHOULD KNOW THIS.
THEY SHOULD KEEP THIS IN MIND.
[SCHERER CONTINUES
IN GERMAN]
TRANSLATOR: ESPECIALLY
HERE IN MEXICO CITY
WHERE THERE ARE
SO MANY CREATIVE PEOPLE.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
[MAN TRANSLATING MANRICO]
AGE, OR THE GENERATIONAL GAP,
SHOULD NOT BE A BARRIER,
BUT IT IS
BECAUSE OUR POLITICIANS
AND GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS
ARE FAR REMOVED FROM
THE CONCEPT OF MODERNITY
WHICH IS PART
OF DIGITAL CULTURE.
THEY SIMPLY GREW UP
IN A DIFFERENT TIME.
TRANSLATOR #2:
YEAH, WHAT IS AT PLAY HERE
IS THE ISSUE OF MODERNITY.
THE YOUNG PEOPLE WHO CAME OUT
AND TOOK OVER THE STREETS
DURING THE 13 HOURS
OF TECHNOGEIST
UNDERSTAND MODERNITY
MUCH BETTER
THAN THEIR POLITICIANS
OR THEIR GOVERNMENT.
[ALOR SPEAKING SPANISH]
TRANSLATOR:
THANKS TO NEW TECHNOLOGIES,
WE'RE BECOMING
MORE DEMOCRATIC,
AND OUR MAINSTREAM MEDIA
IS OPENING UP
BECAUSE, WITH THE INTERNET
IN MEXICO CITY,
WE NO LONGER HAVE
FORBIDDEN TOPICS
OR UNTOUCHABLE POLITICIANS.
[MAN SINGING "LA BAMBA"]
CAPTIONS: BROADCAST TEXT
WWW.BROADCASTTEXT.COM